**Develop and Implement Policies and Management Interventions that Respond to the Priorities**

A well-designed and executed Ocean Health Index assessment should provide important information to stakeholders and decision-makers. In most cases the assessment findings can be used to identify geographic priorities among the regions assessed and sectorial priorities, both within the regions and for the entire study area. The technical team who conducted the assessment should work in collaboration with decision-makers to assess several management scenarios to determine how the Index can be used to identify cost-effective interventions, and to understand the tradeoffs among goals and the consequences for overall ocean health.

Lessons learned from U.S. West Coast Assessment:

The intent of these analyses is not to model precise changes but rather to illustrate expected types and relative magnitudes of change across goals. Rather than being prescriptive, these scenarios provide a powerful decision-support tool that can be used to explore the consequences of management decisions. Realistic implementation of these decisions requires engagement with decision-makers, normative decisions about management goals, fine-tuning of assumptions, and model-based simulations of future conditions. Scenarios intended to inform decision-making at various spatial scales would benefit from vetting model assumptions through a planning process, and require that the Index be applied at the relevant spatial scale. The scenarios demonstrate several key aspects of the Index relevant to decision makers: one) it responds quickly to management actions, giving initial ‘credit’ for those actions, and then further responds over time as the system (social, economic, and ecological) changes; two) tradeoffs inherent in many decisions are captured by the Index (either explicitly as they are built into the Index or implicitly as they would emerge after management actions); and three) the Index allows one to compare very different management actions in a transparent and quantitative way across different sub-regions, thus supporting strategic decision-making. The magnitude of expected change in the Index will necessarily be related to the scale of management action relative to the scale of assessment.

Such scenario analyses are also a key way that the Index can be used to explore potential implications of climate change on ocean health. Because the Index does not model the future, it cannot predict future ocean health. Instead, dynamic process models can be used to simulate ecological and social conditions, and then these results can be fed in as input parameters for calculating an alternate Index score. In this case, the Index can be used to indicate the likely overall ocean health in the future under status quo conditions and a changing climate. Scenario analyses also illustrate how the Index can be used to identify and understand tradeoffs among goals. Some of these known tradeoffs are built into the architecture of the Index, for example in how increased (sustainable) fishing produces higher scores for food provision but lowers other goals due to its negative pressure on them.

As you consider courses of management and policy action, it might be also beneficial to consider the cost-effectiveness of each intervention – that is, what actions will yield the greatest benefits for the fewest amount of resources. Your scenario analysis will provide you with valuable information on the actions that will influence your scores the most, for example: reducing land-based runoff, improving area and condition of mangroves, increasing protection of species and special places, etc. Once you have identified these actions, you should order rank them based on both the effectiveness and their cost. This exercise will allow you to identify the most cost-effective management actions, which increases the utility of your conservation funds.
