**Need for and Benefits of an Ocean Heath Index**

Marine management mandates in the current financially constrained environments are increasingly requiring the establishment of comprehensive management objectives that maximize sustainable production while maintaining healthy oceans. This requires a cycle of measuring conditions, developing and enacting strategic responses, and monitoring continuously. The Ocean Health Index (hereafter the ‘Index’) was developed to support this growing need by providing a framework that quantifies overall ecosystem health, which can be tailored to any spatial context (political and ecological). The Index is the first assessment tool that provides a common platform for scientifically comparing and combining key elements from all dimensions of the oceans health—biological, physical, economic and social – to measure how sustainably people are using the ocean. The Index provides a tool to measure and track changes in several ocean and coastal dimensions through a repeatable, transparent, quantitative, and goal-driven approach. It was developed as a framework to assess coastal oceans in a formulaic manner, and was designed to be customizable to different spatial scales, data availability, and cultural priorities.

The overall structure was purposefully designed with a top-down approach: key benefits to people were identified and categorized as ‘goals’, and the philosophies of why each was included in the Index were distinguished. By combining ocean and coastal benefits under a single framework, the Index allows for a comprehensive and integrated view of marine systems as well as a better understanding of potential trade-offs or synergies among these goals. This structured, but highly tailorable, framework provides a consistent platform from which to conduct assessments through time, and at any spatial scales desired.

While many indices have been created to track particular issues or trends in economics, social science or environmental quality, the Index is the first to define and track ocean health comprehensively. It recognizes that people are part of the ocean ecosystem, evaluates how well the ocean provides ten key benefits to people now, and how well we protect its ability to do so in the future. This index differs from typical indicator-based monitoring systems, be they small, such as managing a seafood farm, or large, such as the Millennium Development Goals. Those systems typically contain a list of indicators each of which assesses performance in a particular task or topic. Performing successfully in many or all categories undoubtedly improves overall performance, but does not provide information on the relationship between the different indicators and sectors evaluated.

As a composite index, the Index integrates the results for and relationships between all categories that it evaluates. Buy integrating information from many different disciplines and sectors the Index represents a significant advance over conventional single-sector approaches to assessing ocean condition. Because the information from the Index can help inform decision-making in terms of identifying cost-effective management interventions to improve ocean health, it addresses the desire of increasing environmental performance in the face of tightening budgets for natural resource management and conservation.
