**Understand the Requirements for Conducting an OHI Assessment**

Before you begin actually running your assessment, it is crucial to have a full understanding of what will be required to complete a successful assessment. Running an assessment is a labor intensive process that requires collaboration, communication, funding, dedication and, perhaps most importantly, data.

It is imperative to ensure that you have all of these components before starting your assessment.

Completing a stakeholder analysis as well as a leading Working Group will greatly enhance your opportunities for and abilities to collaborate and communicate. It will also give you access to a larger pool of resources.

Procuring funding and creating a budget that is informed by the task timeline will also aid in smart spending and decrease the likelihood that funding will run out before the process is completed. For more information on procuring funding and to see how assessments have been funded in the past, click [here](Funding)

The availability of local data is perhaps the single most important requirement for conducting an OHI+ assessment.

Index scores are a reflection of data quality, and thus, accessing the best data available is of the highest importance. Data from existing environmental, social, and economic indicators may be used. All data will be rescaled to specific reference points (targets) before being combined therefore setting these reference points at the appropriate scale is a fundamental component of any assessment. This requires the interpretation of the philosophy of each Index goal and sub-goal using the best available data and indicators. Click [here](Data Requirements) to see a list of data required to conduct an assessment.
