**Who Should Be Involved?**

The assessment process will require a dedicated and interested group of individuals to lead the initiative. This core team, tasked with detailing the process, may include managers, government officials, community members, nongovernmental representatives, and others.

Stakeholder participation may vary greatly depending on the purpose of the assessment and the unique characteristics of the regions chosen for the study. Prior initiatives demonstrate that enduring success is more likely when stakeholders and communities are actively involved throughout the planning process.

The process of implementing the tool will require scientists and leaders to make politically sensitive decisions across multiple social, political and economic dimensions. We recommend creating a Working Group of individuals who are able to commit important time to the processes, and have the authority necessary to represent their organizations. A Technical Working Group can support the calculation of the goal scores and esablish a scientific nature to ensure validity.

Ensuring continuous transparency and participatory opportunities is essential to guaranteeing that the findings will be widely accepted and validated. Although a participatory process is highly encouraged, there should be a balance between stakeholder participation and keeping the process moving along a pre-established timeline. It is very important to create clear guidelines for participation, and assign specific roles and responsibilities to the team members directly involved in the process.

Participant stakeholders could include, but are not limited to, the following:

**Scientific/Academic institutions**

- University research centers

- Government statistics departments

**Government**

- Ministry/Department of:
  - Environment
  - Production
  - Planning
  - Fisheries/aquaculture
  - Tourism


- Agencies:
  - Ocean commission
  -Water

**Non-Governmental Organizations/Civil Society**

- Coastal community leaders/associations

- Fishing associations

- Tourism associations

- Conservation non-profits
