**Coastal Livelihoods and Economies**

This goal focuses on avoiding the loss of ocean-dependent livelihoods and productive coastal economies while maximizing livelihood quality. We measure the status of this goal through two sub-goals: livelihoods (jobs and wages) and economies (revenues). The two halves of this goal are tracked separately because the number and quality of jobs and the amount of revenue produced are both of considerable interest to stakeholders adn governments, and could show very different patterns in some cases (high revenue sectors do not necessarily provide large employment opportunities). The goal aims to maintain, (avoid the loss of) coastal and ocean-dependent livelihoods (jobs)  and productive coastal economies (revenues), while also maximizing livelihood quality (represented by relative wages).

  - **Livelihoods**

    This sub-goal includes two equally important sub-components, the number of jobs, which is a proxy for livelihood quantity, and the per capita average annual wages, which is a proxy for job quality.

    This sub-goal evaluates the benefits people obtain from the oceans in the form of jobs and wages. Jobs and wages produced from marine-related industries are clearly of huge value to many people, even those who do not directly participate in the industries but value community identity, tax revenue, and indirect economic and social impacts of a stable coastal economy.

    Ideally, this goal would capture all marine sectors that supply jobs and wages to coastal communities, incorporating information on the sustainability of different sectors and also working conditions and job satisfaction/identity. The jobs and revenue produced from marine-related industries directly benefit those who are employed, but also those that gain substantial indirect value from community identity, tax revenue, and other related economic and social impacts of a stable coastal economy. Capturing the indirect as well as direct benefits from jobs, wages and revenue from coastal communities and beyond is best; where data do not exist, multipliers derived from the literature can be incorporated into jobs to attempt to capture this. The reference point in this sub-goal will likely be set as a moving window temporal approach and/or a spatial comparison.

  - **Economies**

    This sub-goal captures the economic value associated with marine industries. This is done using revenue from marine sectors as a proxy.

    The economies sub-goal evaluates the revenue generated from marine-based industries. Strong coastal economies are something that people value, and this can be reflected by the GDP generated by these coastal regions both directly and indirectly.

    Ideally, economic data would be collected coastally, and traced from sectors both directly and indirectly related to marine industries. When these data are not available it is possible to use revenue data at a larger scale and adapt them to a coastal area based on population distribution. The reference point in this sub-goal will likely be set as a moving window temporal approach.
