**Disseminating Findings**

Once assessments have been completed it is critical to spend just as much time and energy planning how you will communicate the findings of your assessment to your multiple audiences.

Since one of the main purposes of running an assessment is to inform decision-making, it is imperative that the results be properly communicated in reports or scientific publications. To do this, first consider how these decisions are made and the people that make them. In order to effectively convey your findings to this demographic, you must package it in a way that is compatible with an ecosystem-based management approach.

An ecosystem-based management approach outlines a series of principles to guide management towards long-term sustainability of, in this case, marine and coastal ecosystems. This information seeks to assist decision makers in taking steps toward sustainably managing their coastal resources. For more information on how to set up and implement an ecosystem-based management approach, consult this [guide](http://www.unep.org/pdf/GPA/Ecosystem_based_Management_Markers_for_Assessing_Progress.pdf) created by the United Nations Environment Program.

When disseminating the results of your assessment to policy makers, focus on the main threats for each goal as well as proposed actions to increase resilience scores. Remember, your audience may not have a solid background on the subject you are discussing so you will have to create reports that are quickly and clearly state the issues and solutions you have identified.

When identifying ways to increase resilience scores, it can be helpful to run a few scenarios that would illustrate how scores might react to various policy changes. An example of this can be found in the [U.S. West coast case study](http://www.oceanhealthindex.org/Apps/OHI/Vault/Output?VaultID=7899&ts=1422972909) in which two policy scenarios were run.

It is crucial to the success of these assessments to consistently re-assess your study region on an annual basis to see how it is responding to management decisions. It is only through continued monitoring of these resources that you will better understand how effective your management strategy and policies are and it is only through effective communication that informed decisions can be made. 
