## **Artisanal Fishing Opportunities**

> The **Artisanal Fishing Opportunties** goal shows whether people with the desire to fish on small scales have the opportunity to do so.

#### Philosophy

It is important to capture the degree to which a region permits or encourages artisanal fishing compared to the demand for such fishing opportunities, and if possible, the sustainability of artisanal fishing practices.

The artisanal fishing opportunities goal measures the opportunities for artisanal fishing rather than the amount of fish caught (covered in the **Food Provision** goal) or the household revenue earned from the activities (covered in the **Livelihoods and Economies** goal). In the Global Assessments, higher scores reflect high potential for the local population to access local ocean resources, regardless of whether or not those people actually do get access. This goal is about economic access,  physical access, and access to the fish themselves. Economic access is comprised of needs and costs involved, and physical access is determined by how possible it is for individuals to get to the resource. Access to the fish themselves is a reflection of how robust fish populations are measured ot be.

Damaging practices are sometimes used in artisanal fishing, such as the use of cyanide or dynamite, and these are penalized in the Index calculations. Such practices also lead **Artisanal Fishing Opportunities** to interact in a negative way with other goals.

#### Ideal Approach

Ideally, this goal would include some measure of how easy or hard it is for people to access ocean resources when they need them and a quantified evaluation of the sustainability of harvest of all nearshore stocks used by artisanal fishermen. It will require the creative combination of different kind of data elements.

#### Keep in Mind

This goal reflects only the access people have to coastal resources, not necessarily whether they actually do fish in those waters. In other words, It measures the potential for artisanal fishing whether or not this potential is actually met. This is because this goal specifically tries to estimate whether individuals or households have the access to the sea that they need for their own survival. The status for this goal is estimated as a function of need for artisanal fishing opportunities and whether or not the opportunity is permitted or encouraged institutionally, and whether artisanal fishing could be sustainable.

Keep in mind also that the amount of seafood caught, if reported, is contained within the **Food Provision** or **Natural Products** goals. Meanwhile, any wages or revenue are included instead in the **Livelihoods and Economies** goal. The data for this goal should therefore reflect its unique intention.

#### History of the Approach

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a score
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------|
**Global 2012** | Status for this goal is measured as the demand for opportunities to fish artisanally. Demand is estimated using poverty levels as proxy, measured by the gross domestic product (GDP) per capita, adjusted by the purchasing power parity. The supply was estimated using an indicator that ranked how well regions regulated and supported artisanal fishing, as part of a study by Mora et al. (2009). This assessment did not incorporate a measure of the health of the targeted species or of sustainability of the fishing practices as a standardized artisanal harvest database was not available at a global scale. <br> The reference point for artisanal fishing opportunities is that all demand for artisanal fishing is allowed and/or achieved and that the fishing is done in a way that doesn't compromise future fishing resources. Thus, the reference point is that ‘supply’ (i.e., fisheries regulations as measured by Mora et al. (2009)) is greater than demand so that unmet demand is 0, i.e., all demand for artisanal fishing is allowed and/or achieved. |  The need for artisanal fishing could potentially be driven by any number of socio-economic factors, but perhaps the most wide-spread reason is the need for food either directly or through undocumented local trade which correlates well with poverty level. Data on how many people live below the poverty level are not available for many regions. Therefore, we used an analogous proxy that is more complete globally: per capita gross domestic product (pcGDP) adjusted by the purchasing power parity (PPP). Because no time series data were available for the access to artisanal fishing measured in the study by Mora et al. (2009), the trend was actually solely driven by the change over time in the PPPpcGDP, i.e., how ‘demand’ is changing over time. The sustainability of artisanal fishing practices could be approximated by using the status of the species that are targeted by artisanal fishermen. Unfortunately data on harvest from artisanal fisheries are often unavailable so we were unable to include this term in the calculation of this goal; we include it here for conceptual completeness. | A score of 100 means that a region is addressing and meeting the needs that people and communities have to fish artisanally by implementing government policies that permit or encourage them to do so, providing appropriate access to near-shore areas, and maintaining the species targeted in good health. A low score indicates that regions are not achieving or allowing sustainable artisanal fishing opportunities to be realized.
**Global 2013** | Same as Global 2012. No data update available. | Same as Global 2012. No data update available. |
**Brazil (2014)** | Economic or physical access or demand to fishing were not deemed to reflect circumstances in Brazil, and therefore this simplified model reflects that the primary driver of artisanal fishing opportunity is the availability of fish to capture (i.e., the condition of the stocks).<br  />This model was based solely on the sustainability index calculated using the exploitation status of species. The reference point for artisanal fishing opportunities is an established target of 1.0, that is, all stocks are categorized as either Developing or Fully Exploited. Due to the widespread nature of artisanal fisheries throughout Brazil, and the major contribution of small-scale activities to total landings for the country, all species were considered possible targets of artisanal fishing activities. | In Global 2012 artisanal fishing opportunity was assessed as a function of the need and the accessibility with a place-holder for stock status (which could not be assessed at global scales for artisanal-scale fishing). For Brazil the primary driver of artisanal fishing opportunity is the availability of fish to capture (i.e. the condition of the stocks).<br  /><br  />Because the scale of analysis for which we had stock status information was national, we chose not to include a measure of artisanal need (levels of poverty), which has great variation within Brazil. In addition, we assume that access to fishing is largely open because permitting and regulations from the Ministry of Fisheries are not considered restrictive, and in most cases, neither is physical access. |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | We developed a model using physical and economic access to coastal areas and access to the biological resources through the effectiveness of fisheries management as key variables. This approach does not model demand, but simply assumes that as long as there are no obstacles to pursuing artisanal fishing, the goal is fully achieved. These data better capture the nature of small-scale fisheries in the study area (artisanal, subsistence, and small-scale commercial) whereas the global model focused essentially on subsistence fishing. <br> Members of the public in the region fish artisanally from shore-based coastal access points (like beaches and jetties) as well as from boats. The key variables affecting access to these two modes of artisanal fishing differ and so we treat them separately in our assessment. Shore-based fishing is primarily constrained by physical access to fishing locations and is thus measured as percent of coastline within a mile of coastal access points. The target here is to maximize the amount of public access along the coast, therefore a perfect score results when each part of a region’s coastline has a coastal access point within 1 mile. We calculate these scores using a raster allocation model with 1-mile resolution intersecting at the coastline. | There are no data available on the number of people actively participating in artisanal fishing activities, nor a good approximation of what a reasonable reference condition would be that would allow to model ‘demand’ for artisanal fishing opportunities were these data available. Instead, we only consider physical and economic access to fishing opportunities and to the biological resources by assessing the condition of targeted fish stocks in the region, focusing exclusively on whether artisanal fishing opportunities are being fully provided in the region. This approach differs from the Global 2012 and 2013 assessments, where artisanal fishing opportunities were assessed as a function of need (based on the level of poverty present in a region) and the effectiveness of small-scale fisheries management in satisfying this need, mainly focusing on artisanal opportunities for subsistence purposes. It is also important to note that we were able to incorporate the accessibility to the desired species (i.e. status of the targeted stocks) only in this assessment because of data availability, but ideally we would’ve included this also in Global 2012 and 2013. |

***
