## **Coastal Protection**

> **Coastal Protection** describes the condition and extent of habitats that protect the coasts against storm waves and flooding. It measures the area they currently cover relative to the area they covered in the recent past.

#### Philosophy

Many habitats, including coral reefs, mangroves, seagrasses, salt marshes, and sea ice, act as natural buffers against incoming waves. By protecting against storm damage, flooding, and erosion, these living habitats keep people safe and can help mitigate economic loss of personal and public property, cultural landmarks, and natural resources. The **Coastal Protection** goal assesses the amount of protection provided by marine and coastal habitats by measuring the area they cover now relative to the area they covered in the recent past.

#### Ideal Approach

Ideally, data for all habitats within regions of a study area would be available, as well as information on the value of the land and the vulnerability of inhabitants being protected by these habitats. This would require data for each habitat type at a high spatial resolution as well as a measure of the value of what is protected by the habitats. The reference point for habitat-based goals will likely be a temporal baseline and historic data would be needed such that current habitat and value data can be compared to them.

#### Keep in Mind

The Global studies did not include an assessment of the protection afforded by human-made structures such as jetties and seawalls, because these structures cannot be preserved without maintenance and do not constitute long-term sustainable services. They may also have other undesirable side effects such as the altering of sedimentation rates causing erosion in new and unexpected locations.

#### History of the Approach

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a score
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------|
**Global 2012** | The status of this goal was calculated to be a function of the amount and/or condition (depending on data availability) of marine habitat(s) relative to their reference states and the ranked protective ability of each habitat type. Rank weights for the protective ability of each habitat come from previous work that ranks mangroves, corals and sea ice as 4, salt marshes as 3, and seagrasses as 1, where higher values are better.<br  /><br  />The reference point compares the current extent and condition of five key habitats that protect coastlines (mangrove forests, seagrass meadows, salt marshes, tropical coral reefs, and sea ice) from flooding and erosion relative to their condition in the early 1980's. | At global scales, fine-scale habitat data do not exist and so we focused on EEZ-scale assessments, even though this scale does not allow one to account for the spatial configuration of habitats relative to coastal areas and the vulnerability of human coastal communities. Consequently, we assumed that all coastal areas have equal value and equal vulnerability and assessed the total area and condition of key habitats within each EEZ (without regard to their precise location). The habitats that provide protection to coastal areas from inundation and erosion and for which we have global data include mangroves, coral reefs, seagrasses, salt marshes, and sea ice. | A score of 100 would indicate that these habitats are all still intact or have been restored to the reference condition (i.e. their extent during the early 1980’s if using Global 2012, or 50% of their extent for some of the habitats in US West Coast, etc.). Any score below 100 indicates that these habitats have declined in coverage or in health since then, with lower scores indicating more significant declines, and stronger penalties for declines in habitats with high protection ability (e.g. mangroves in Global 2012).
**Global 2013** | The goal model and reference point were the same as in Global 2012. | Same as Global 2012. |
**Brazil (2014)** | Same goal model as Global 2012, using local data.<br  /><br  />To calculate the reference state for coral reef status within Brazil we lacked a minimum of two data points within the time period 1980-1995 (which was considered the acceptable range to use as “reference” years). We therefore estimated the status as the averages of scores from 24 countries within the Caribbean ecoregion that had sufficient coral data. For each of those countries, we fitted a linear model to the data available, pooled across all sampled sites, and we defined the ‘current’ condition (health) as the mean of the predicted values for 2008-2010, and the reference condition as the mean of the predicted values for 1985-1987. | Area was measured for each coastal state as the 12 nmi jurisdiction boundary for each habitat type. For mangroves we focused only on the most coastal portion of mangrove forests as they are the main source of coastal protection. For seagrasses we used the total reported extent of seagrasses in Brazil divided by the coastal area of each state. For coral reefs we calculated the extent per coastal waters of each state using maps of coral reef distribution. The salt marsh extents for Santa Catarina and Rio Grande do Sul states are from national statistics. |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | Same as Global 2012, with more ambitious reference points for target habitat coverage.<br  /><br  />Reliable, comprehensive habitat extent data prior to the 1990s are unavailable for most coastal regions within the U.S. Estimates of habitat loss since European settlement have been extrapolated in some regions for some habitats. However, while the habitat extent from the 1990s would represent a very un-ambitious target, a pre-industrialized reference point for habitat extent is considered an unrealistic goal under current conditions. To establish our temporal reference points we instead set our reference uniquely for each habitat, as a percentage of pre-industrialized habitat coverage for salt marshes, as habitat extent between the 1950s and 1960s for sand dunes, or utilized pressures on habitats as a proxy of habitat condition for seagrasses and soft bottom habitats. | In the U.S. west coast we measured the role of salt marshes, seagrasses, and sand dunes as these habitats provide the most significant and measurable amount of coastal protection and had data available to include. |

***
