## **Carbon Storage**

> **Carbon Storage** describes how much carbon is stored in natural coastal ecosystems that absorb and sequester it in large amounts.

#### Philosophy

**Carbon Storage** evaluates the status of coastal marine habitats with high carbon storage capacity. In this case, "storage" means carbon sequestration.
Highly productive coastal wetland ecosystems, like mangroves, salt marshes, and seagrass beds, have substantially larger areal carbon burial rates than terrestrial forests. Coastal habitats therefore play a significant role in mitigating global carbon levels, and the health of these habitats is important because their destruction also releases large quantities of carbon into the atmosphere, damaging the overall health of coupled marine systems and furthering global climate change.

> Though they form less than 2% of the ocean’s surface, coastal ecosystems contribute more to long-term carbon storage and sequestration in sediments than any other ocean ecosystem.

 Our focus here is on coastal habitats, so-called "Blue Carbon", because they have large potential to store carbon without causing acidification, and, contrary to open oceans, they provide a carbon storage service that can be affected by human actions such as conservation, and restoration efforts.

> The Global 2012 assessment focuses on three ecosystems — mangroves, tidal marshes and seagrasses — for their ability to store and sequester carbon in their plants and soils. When destroyed or degraded, these ecosystems not only stop sequestering carbon but can start to release it, and can emit carbon for centuries and contribute to climate change.

#### Ideal Approach

Ideally, to assess the amount of carbon stored in every coastal habitat, information would be available regarding coverage area and some measure of quality. For example, you would have data for both the spatial coverage of a mangrove and know its tree density. Additionally, different weights would be assigned to the habitats based on their relative ability to store carbon. The carbon storage model can incorporate such weights once they are available in a similar way to the methods developed for the coastal protection goal. The reference point for habitat-based goals will likely be a comparison with a historic extent or state; this means that historic data are needed such that current habitat extent data can be compared to them.

> TIP: The relative carbon storage abilities for different habitats is an area of active research.

#### Keep in Mind

<!---Shorten?--->In basic terms, the plants take up carbon dioxide and store it in organic form within their tissues.  Leaves and detritus that fall to the bottom and become covered with sediment retain those organic compounds for centuries or millennia if undisturbed. Storms and human development disturbance exposes this buried material to oxygen with the result that carbon dioxide is released and traps even more eat in the Earth's atmosphere.

 Even though the pelagic oceanic plays a large role in the sequestration of anthropogenic carbon, by acting as a large carbon sink, the mechanisms for open ocean carbon storage cannot be managed locally or regionally as there are no practical methods for intervention or manipulation. On top of that, the storage of global carbon in ocean water leads to its acidification, which has many consequences for marine life.

Because they store carbon for less than 100 years, seaweeds and corals were not included in the carbon storage goal in the Global Assessments. While the pelagic oceanic carbon sink, consisting of phytoplankton, plays a large role in the sequestration of anthropogenic carbon, the pelagic ocean mechanisms are not amenable to local or regional management intervention. Phytoplankton contribute to carbon fixation when they die and sink to the sea bottom at sufficient depth, because it is effectively out of circulation. However, if those phytoplankton are eaten, the carbon is cycled back into the system and not sequestered.

Something that could potentially be included in the carbon storage goal in the future is mollusc shells, if they are added to a landfill and not recycled in the sea. So if information on mariculture production and waste disposal are available, this could be an interesting addition to carbon storage at a regional scale.

#### History of the Approach

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a score
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------|
**Global 2012** | The status of Carbon Storage is measured as a function of its current ‘condition’ relative to a reference condition and a variable that weights the relative contribution of each habitat type to total carbon storage (measured as the amount of area each habitat covers relative to the total area covered by all three habitats given the available data). In Global 2012, the coastal ecosystems assessed were seagrasses, tidal marshes and mangroves.<br  /><br  />Reference conditions were set as the current condition or area of coastal plant habitat coverage relative to that in ~1980. This is not a very ambitious reference point, but the best that the data would allow. | We focused on three coastal habitats known to provide meaningful amounts of carbon storage: mangroves, seagrasses, and salt marshes. For mangroves, we included the whole extent of the coastal forests, including the parts on land or in river deltas, since these too provide significant additional amounts of carbon storage. | A score of 100 would indicate that the percent cover (and health, when measured) of each habitat had not changed since the date set as reference point (the 1980s or pre-industrial coverage, depending on the assessment used).
**Global 2013** | The goal model and reference point were the same as in Global 2012. There were improvements in data processing were.<br  /><br  />The reference point was the same as Global 2012. | Mangrove data used in the goal model were processed differently than described in Global 2012: data now include 1km inland in addition to 1km offshore. |
**Brazil (2014)** | The goal model was the same as in Global 2012.<br  /><br  />The reference condition was determined specifically for each habitat type. For salt marshes the reference year is 1975. For mangroves, we knew the current (2010) extent per state, but only had a total country extent for the reference year (1980). We apportioned the total reported mangrove extent for Brazil in 1980 by state using a linear regression model that estimates the percent of mangrove loss per state. Data to assess current and reference condition for seagrasses did not meet minimum data requirements: they were available only for three sites in Brazil within the time period 2002-2010 (no data for a reference condition). For this reason, we used available data from adjacent EEZs (countries in the South Atlantic) and used georegional averages as current condition and reference condition values for Brazil. A linear model was fitted to the data for all countries, and the mean of predicted values for 1979-1981 was used as the reference condition, and the mean of predicted values of the three most recent years (2008, 2009, 2010) was used as the current condition. | The same approach was used as in Global 2012, with local data used as available. |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | We used reconstructions of historic extents compared to current habitat coverage to set more ambitious targets. However, the historical reconstructions did not include information on habitat health so only extent was used in this assessment.<br  /><br  />Reliable, comprehensive habitat extent data prior to the 1990s are unavailable for most coastal regions within the U.S. Estimates of habitat loss since European settlement have been extrapolated in some regions for some habitats. However, while the habitat extent from the 1990s would represent a very un-ambitious target, a pre-industrialized reference point for habitat extent is considered an unrealistic goal under current conditions. To establish our temporal reference points we instead set our reference uniquely for each habitat, as a percentage of pre-industrialized habitat coverage for salt marshes, as habitat extent between the 1950s and 1960s for sand dunes, or utilized pressures on habitats as a proxy of habitat condition for seagrasses and soft bottom habitats. | Only two out of the three habitats considered in the global analysis were included here: salt marshes and seagrass beds. Mangroves are not found in the US West Coast and are not included in this assessment. |

***
