## **Clean Waters**

> The **Clean Waters** goal captures the degree to which local waters are polluted by natural and human-made causes.

#### Philosophy

**Clean Waters** are important to both people and the marine life on which they depend. People enjoy having unpolluted estuarine, coastal, and marine waters both for their aesthetic value and for their importance to health. Sewage pollution, nutrient runoff, chemical pollution, and marine trash all make coastal waters less clean. This leads to human problems, such as fecal coliform ingestion, and ecosystem problems like eutrophication and algal blooms. This goal scores highest when the contamination level is zero, and the Global  model ensures that just one of the pollutants can drive the score because. The philosophy is that one of the pollutant can greatly impact the system because of the sensitivity of the system.

#### Ideal Approach

Ideally, data would be available and combined from many different categories of marine pollution to best capture the factors that can cause waters to become unsuitable for recreation or other purposes. There would be data available across various classes of contaminants, including organic pollutants, inorganic pollutants, metals, oils, turbidity, and trash. Having good data from each of the desired categories, such as those culled from a repeated effort at monitoring the conditions of the coasts, would be ideal. For the reference point, a functional relationship would be best for setting hard use limits.

#### Keep in Mind

Due to data constraints, the models described in the Global Assessments mostly used information on pollutant inputs from point sources. If in-situ measurements of water and biological uptake from organisms are available, these types of information would be preferred. Particularly, information on eutrophication anomalies, anoxic regions, and toxic blooms, would be preferable to the nutrient inputs used in previous assessment, which are really just proxies for the better data.

> In the Global Assessments, it was not possible to assess specific toxic chemicals at the global scale; however regional case studies often might have data available for the quantities and toxicity of a range of chemicals put into watersheds and coastal waters. In addition, where possible and relevant, we recommend including additional component that could not be covered in the models presented in the Global due to data constraints, such as altered sedimentation or turbidity.

#### History of the Approach

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a score
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------|
**Global 2012** | We aggregated various measures of pollution into four components that comprise the Clean Waters goal: eutrophication (nutrients), chemicals, pathogens and marine debris. This decision was meant to represent a comprehensive list of the contamination categories that are commonly considered in assessments of coastal clean waters and for which we could obtain datasets. The status of this goal is calculated as the geometric mean of four components: the number of people without access to sanitation (i.e. coastal population density times % without access to enhanced sanitation), 1 – (nutrient input), 1 – (chemical input), and 1 – (marine debris input).<br  /><br  />We used a geometric mean, as is commonly done for water quality indices, because a very bad score for any one sub-component would pollute the waters sufficiently to make people feel the waters were ‘too dirty’ to enjoy for recreational or aesthetic purposes (e.g. a large oil spill trumps any other measure of pollution).<br  /><br  />This goal scores highest when the contamination level is zero. |  Because of limited data availability for chemical pollution, we measured the chemicals component as the average of land-based organic pollution, land-based inorganic pollution and ocean-based pollution from commercial shipping and ports. We did not have global data for oil spills and so could not include oil pollution (although we did include pollution from ships), but in future assessments where such data exist it would be included in chemical pollution as well. In all four cases, the status of these components is the inverse of their intensity (i.e., high input produces a low status).<br  /><br  />Human-derived pathogens reach coastal waters primarily from sewage discharge or direct human defecation. Since we did not have access to a global database of in situ measurements of pathogen levels, we used a proxy measure for the status of pathogen pollution, namely the number of people in coastal areas without access to improved sanitation facilities. The underlying assumption is that locations with a low percentage of people with access to improved facilities will likely have higher levels of coastal water contamination from human pathogens. To estimate this pathogen intensity, we multiplied average population density within the 50km of land adjacent to coasts by the percentage of the population without access to improved sanitation. This allows regions with low coastal population densities and low access to improved sanitation to score better than high population regions with better access if the absolute number of people without access is lower in the small region. | A score of 100 would indicate that the contamination level is zero.
**Global 2013** | The goal model and reference point were the same as Global 2012. | The approach was the same as Global 2012. |
**Brazil (2014)** | The goal model and reference point were the same as Global 2012. | Data used to model the components for eutrophication (nutrients) and chemicals was the same as in Global 2012. In short, nutrient pollution is estimated using a model of land-based nitrogen inputs and chemical pollution is measure via three global datasets on pollution from agricultural pesticide use, runoff from impervious surfaces, and commercial shipping and ports. Data to characterize pathogen and marine debris pollution were developed using state-level data for Brazil. We used the same approach to model both components, namely the number of people in coastal areas without access to sewage treatment (pathogens), and without access to improved solid waste management of three types (marine debris). |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | The model was the same as Global 2012, with regional instead of global data.<br  /><br  />The reference point for pathogens was modified due to better data available. This was set as the number of days when beaches were closed to bathers because pathogen counts were higher than state standards. | The approach was the same as Global 2012, with regional instead of global data. |
