## **Food Provision**

> The aim of **Food Provision** is to optimize the sustainable level of seafood harvest in your region's waters.

The aim of this goal is to maximize the sustainable harvest of seafood in regional waters from **Wild-Caught Fisheries** and **Mariculture**, or ocean-farmed seafood. Regions are rewarded for maximizing the amount of sustainable seafood provided and they are penalized for unsustainable practices or for under-harvest. Because fisheries and mariculture are separate industries with very different features, each is tracked separately as a unique sub-goal under **Food Provision**. They are then combined after each sub-goal is weighted by the proportion of the total yield it contributes to total food provision.

### **Wild-Caught Fisheries**

>The **Wild-Caught Fisheries** sub-goal describes the amount of wild-caught seafood harvested and its sustainability for human consumption. Higher scores reflect fishing practices with sustainably high yields that avoid excessively high exploitation and do not target threatened existing fish populations.

#### Philosophy

This sub-goal measures the ability to obtain maximal wild harvests without damaging the ocean's ability to continue providing similar quantities of fish for people in the future. The optimal levels are described by Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY). Higher scores reflect fishing practices with sustainably high yields that avoid excessively high exploitation, or overfishing, and do not target threatened populations. Regions are penalized for resources that are either underfished or overfished because both of these conditions detract from the overall achievement of maximized food provision.

Wild-caught fisheries harvests must remain below levels that would compromise the resource and its future harvest, but the amount of seafood harvested should be maximized within the bounds of sustainability. The reference point is set with a functional relationship. This calculation model aims to assess the amount of wild-caught seafood that can be sustainably harvested, with sustainability defined by multi-species yield, and with penalties assigned for both over- and under-harvesting. This is a departure from traditional conservation goals regarding wild-caught fisheries where under-harvesting is usually not penalized. In other circumstances, penalties are only given for over-harvesting, such as in the case for concerned fisheries managers who use over-harvesting as a way to guide enforcement. In the case of OHI, however, the idea is to assess the delivery of a sustainable benefit or the missed opportunity for one, and therefore any distance from the optimum is a penalty.

This sub-goal can interact with other goals and sub-goals through, for example through the destruction of surrounding habitats that can  decrease the productivity of farmed fisheries indirectly.

#### Ideal Approach

Ideally, data for catch size and amount of effort of every commercially- and recreationally-fished species would be available for a place, as well as the functional relationship between the fish population's size in terms of biomass, and fisheries catch effort. This would allow an accurate MSY to be calculated appropriate for the region. Then, fisheries catch and effort information would be used to calculate the present state and MSY would be used to set the reference point. Current status would be calculated using the present state of every species in turn and then combining each species together to get a weighted proportion of the total catch.

#### Keep in Mind

The assessment sustainability, of course, depends on the quality of the underlying stock assessments. Better methods for data-poor stocks had been developed in Global 2013, improving upon those developed for Global 2012. When better data are available and local experts have produced formal stock assessments, better-informed models can be developed, as was done in U.S. West Coast study (2014).

This sub-goal also cannot determine whether the set-points are optimum for other parts of system. For example, this model does not address food security more broadly because this goal does not assess where or by whom the catch is being consumed, and it does not assess nutrition quality either. Potentially, the outcome from assessing the **Food Provision** goal could be used as input if a separate 'food security assessment' were developed.

####History of the Approach

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a Score |
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------|
**Global 2012** | Status of the Fisheries sub-goal was calculated as a function of the absolute difference between a region’s total landed biomass from the reference multi-species maximum sustainable yield weighted by a correction factor that adjusts for taxonomic reporting quality of the data.<br  /><br  />The reference point is based on an estimate of the optimum amount of all marine species that may be caught sustainably, minimizing the likelihood of overfishing while maximizing harvest, i.e. the multispecies MSY (mMSY). This was calculated by summing all the single-species MSY estimates obtained for commercially landed species. The reference point for wild-caught fisheries was set at 25% below mMSY to take into account that mMSY may be overestimated because single-species estimates of MSY obtained under current conditions may change.<br  /><br  />Indeed, when all species are exploited simultaneously, the fishing pressure that each population can withstand might be lower (or higher) due to changes in interactions between species, e.g. if a prey population is reduced, a predator may not be as abundant as predicted by the single species model (or vice versa for the prey species, in the case of a predator species becoming less abundant). By picking a lower reference point, we adopt a precautionary estimate of the total amount of seafood that could be sustainably caught. In other words, the reference point is set so the total landed biomass of wild-caught species will not be more than 75% of the estimated mMSY. Regions are penalized for harvests above or below this reference level (more heavily if above). <br  /><br  /> | At a global scale, catch, effort, and MSY estimates are not available for either commercial, artisanal or recreational fishing: only landings data for commercial fisheries are available through the United Nations Food and Agriculture program (UN FAO). Thus, within the aims of the wild-caught fisheries goal, the ideal approach had to be modified to be appropriate for the data that were available. Working with fisheries scientists to adapt the ideal approach, data from all commercially fished species in a region were used to estimate the MSY for each species and were combined to obtain a reference point of multispecies MSY. | Higher scores reflect fishing practices with sustainably high yields that avoid excessively high exploitation (overfishing), and do not target threatened populations.<br  /><br />For Global 2012 and 2013, the formulae show that a stock receives a score of zero if either it is completely depleted, i.e. B/BMSY = 0, or strongly underfished, i.e. B/ BMSY = 3.35, with 3.35 representing the local currently observed maximum value. Any past or future B/ BMSY values greater than 3.35, as well as the species with this maximum value, would receive a zero score for food provision to denote that the species is severely underfished. However, given that underutilization of resources is generally easier to remediate than depletion, we apply an asymmetrical buffer around values of B/ BMSY close to 1 that get assigned a perfect score, (i.e., overfished stocks achieve a perfect score if B/BMSY is up to 0.2 points below 1 but underfished stocks achieve a perfect score if B/BMSY is within 0.5 points of 1). Thus, overfished species negatively influence the long-term sustainable delivery of the food provision goal more than underfished species do.
**Global 2013** | Status of the Fisheries sub-goal was calculated based on estimating population biomass relative to the biomass that can deliver maximum sustainable yield for each landed stock (B/BMSY). The estimates of B/BMSY were obtained by applying a model developed by Martell & Frœse, (2013), and referred to as the “catch-MSY” method. This ratio is conventionally used to inform fisheries management. <br  /><br  /> This approach adopts the population biomass at MSY (BMSY) as a single-species reference point, which by various assessment frameworks is considered conservative (e.g., Frœse et al. 2011). Single-species values of B/ BMSY are aggregated using a geometric mean ensuring that some multi-species effects may influence the scores. <br  /><br  /> This is a more direct measure of population health because it relates directly to population size, rather than the harvested biomass of those populations. More importantly, this reference point was calculated through a more robust model than the one used in Global 2012, published by Frœse & Martell in 2013. | Since Global 2012, several new data-poor approaches have been developed to assess fisheries that leverage globally-available information (Costello et al., 2012; Martell & Frœse, 2013; Thorson et al., 2013). The catch-MSY approach improves upon the method used in Global 2012 in that it leverages a mechanistic understanding of the connection between harvest dynamics and population dynamics and uses this to infer stock depletion levels as a function of both historical patterns in catch and of species-specific resilience traits (see also Thorson et al. 2013). In addition, this model is more informative in the case of developing fisheries, whereas the previous approach assumed a perfect score in cases where a peak with successive decline had yet to be observed. <br>The “catch-MSY” model, as designed by Martell & Frœse, calculates catch/MSY. For our analyses, we converted this to an estimate of B/BMSY, i.e. an indicator of stock abundance rather than catch, which is more directly informative of stock heath. This more complex (although still data poor) approach better takes into account species-specific fishery dynamics.  In addition, the scores for each population were combined using a geometric mean, which ensures that smaller, rarer populations have more weight and thus biodiversity of the catch is taken into account as well. As before, regions are penalized for underharvest and (more severely) for overharvest. |
**Brazil (2014)** | Status of the Fisheries sub-goal was calculated in the same manner as Global 2012, with a modified sustainability term. <br  /><br  /> As in Global 2012, the reference point is based on an estimate of the optimum amount of all marine species that may be caught sustainably: mMSY. | The fisheries sub-goal was calculated in the same manner as Global 2012; this study was conducted before improvements to the approach (Global 2013). However, local-scale data on exploitation category of species caught within Brazil’s EEZ was used as catch-based sustainability index, an improvement over the original Global 2012 approach. |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | Status of the Fisheries sub-goal was based on population biomass relative to the biomass that can deliver maximum sustainable yield (B/BMSY) and fishing mortality relative to fishing mortality that can deliver maximum sustainable yield (F/FMSY) for each landed stock, using formal stock assessments rather than relying solely on data-poor estimates from catch data. These ratios are conventionally used to inform fisheries management. <br  /><br  /> This approach adopts the population biomass at MSY, i.e. BMSY, as a single-species reference point, in combination with the fishing mortality at maximum sustainable yield, i.e. FMSY. | Stock assessments were only available for 41 different species across the whole study area. These 41 species accounted for ~59% of the total average catch across the catch time series data. We tested the use of a recently published data-poor approach (Costello et al. 2012) to obtain B/ BMSY values for the remaining stocks. To validate the results we compared estimates for which we had formal stock assessment values and found the latter to be outside the confidence bounds predicted by the model. Other estimates of overfishing are available for data poor stocks (Dick & MacCall 2010), however these only cover ~2% of overall catches. Therefore, our analyses were only based on values from assessed stocks.<br  /><br  />From each assessment we extracted the estimates for B/BMSY and F/FMSY that are assigned to the whole species throughout the west coast of the US. Fisheries scores were then assigned to each region based on the contribution of each species in each region to the overall catch in that region. These weights were assigned based on the average catch of each species across all years of recorded catches (1950-2011). This means that each species gets a single score in the overall study area, and what differentiates the scores from region to region is which species are in that area and how much they contribute to the area’s average historical catch. We used the average catch over time instead of current catch as a weighting factor as it reflects the mean potential contribution of each species to total food provision, smoothing over stochastic fluctuations and possible recent declines. Catch data were only available at the state level, so all regions within California received the same status score. |  For the U.S. West Coast, combining F/FMSY with the population size compared to the size that ensures MSY (B/BMSY) allows us to take into consideration how it is currently being exploited. A population that is dwindling, but is also not under heavy fishing pressure, has more chances of recovering and so it receives a higher score than one that has a similar B/BMSY but is also under strong fishing pressure, thus being most likely to continue in its decline in the near future. On the other hand, a population that is abundant, but has a low F/FMSY, is not being exploited to its full potential and thus its score gets partially penalized due to this underutilization. This approach produces lower scores for species where both underfishing and overfishing are occurring, but does not punish as severely for underfishing of stocks.

*****

### **Mariculture**

>**Mariculture** measures the ability to reach the highest levels of seafood gained from far-raised facilities without damaging the ocean's ability to provide fish sustainably now and in the future.

#### Philosophy

Mariculture practices must be sustainable and also maximize the amount of food production that is physically possible and desired by regional governments and those who buy, sell and eat that food. This sub-goal shows whether or not maximal seafood yield from farm-raised facilities is occurring without damaging the ocean’s ability to continue providing fish for people in the future. It is founded on the idea that mariculture practices must not inhibit the future production of seafood in the area.

Higher scores mean that food provisioning is being done in a sustainable manner while not compromising the water quality in the farmed area and not relying on wild populations to feed or replenish the cultivated species. A score of 100 means that a region is sustainably harvesting the greatest amount of farmed seafood possible based on its own maximum potential relative to the conditions of the assessment. As for **Wild-Caught Fisheries**, a low score can indicate one of two things – that species are either being farmed in an unsustainable manner, or that assessed areas are not maximizing the potential to farm in their waters.

#### Ideal Approach

Ideally, information on the spatial area available for mariculture would be available, as well as data on the sustainability of that production. Availability could be determined by social expectations and priorities, not just geographical space. This would mean that data are available for the physical coastal and offshore habitat appropriate for each intended type of mariculture service and that areas have been identified as socially appropriate. At a regional scale, better data should demonstrate any restrictions based on habitat, conflicting uses, and social preferences.

#### Keep in Mind

This approach would not necessarily penalize regions that have less geographic area available for mariculture, because it is relative to what is marked as available. However, places with fewer sheltered bays or lower primary production, for example, could be at a disadvantage compared to places that have more favorable conditions.

The appropriateness of the approach will also vary depending on the geography and what's socially desirable. For instance, in the Global 2012 study, China's ratio of area dedicated to mariculture production relative to area available showed the highest score and therefore became the reference point against which other countries' values were compared. Simply maximizing isn't always desirable, however. The social component is important because mariculture competes for space with many other ocean uses, including other kinds of fishing and tourism activities. This sub-goal reveals linkages among ocean health issues.

>As another example, Global 2012 did not have information about social limitations for how much coastal area could be allotted to mariculture, and therefore it included the entire area of the coastline in the calculation. This assumed that mariculture could be developed everywhere, which isn't always socially desirable.


#### History of the Approach

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a Score |
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------|
**Global 2012** | Mariculture was calculated as the yield reported to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) multiplied by the sustainability for each species harvested.<br  /><br  />The reference point is based on the goal for each region to produce as much farmed seafood as sustainably possible within its coastal area. The reference point for mariculture is a spatial comparison (and not a theoretical functional relationship for sustainable production yield as there is for wild-caught fisheries), set at the amount of seafood produced per square kilometer of eligible coastline in the most productive region, which, at the time of the global study, was China. Setting a spatial reference point in this way assumes that because China is able to produce such a high proportion of mariculture to its coastal area, all regions should be able to as well, given current ecological and technological conditions. This also assumes that it is socially desirable for all regions to produce farmed species at this level, which is likely not true for all regions.<br  /><br  />Global 2012 compared all areas to that with the highest observed production density after the sustainability coefficient was applied, based on the assumption that all coastal area in each region could be developed for mariculture at the same production density as the reference region (i.e., China) and that maximum potential productivity per unit of area is similar across ecosystems and regions. This caused regions with extensive proportions of coastline where mariculture is unsuitable for biological reasons (e.g., the water freezes for large part of the year) or logistical reasons (e.g., scarcely inhabited), such as Canada, to be unduly penalized. | At the global scale it was not possible to account for all physically appropriate habitats where mariculture could occur, and thus the entire area within 3nm from the coastline was considered potential habitat, although it is clear that that entire habitat is not physically suitable for mariculture, nor would it be socially desirable to do so. However, restricting the area based on biophysical constraints and social preferences at a global scale was not possible. Gauging mariculture sustainability was difficult and was ultimately based on information from a Mariculture Sustainability Index (MSI) by Trujillo (2008). The MSI incorporated information on wastewater treatment, origin of feed (i.e., fishmeal or other) and the origin of seed (i.e., hatchery or wild caught). The MSI, however, was not recalculated after 2005 and, when missing, values from other regions or from related species had to be used. | Higher scores reflect high food provisioning in a sustainable manner, while not compromising the water quality in the farmed area and not relying on wild populations to feed or replenish the cultivated species. A score of 100 means that a region is sustainably harvesting the greatest amount of farmed seafood possible based on its own potential (where its maximum potential is estimated in different ways depending on the assessment). A low score can indicate one of two things – that species are being farmed in an unsustainable manner or that regions are not maximizing the potential to farm in their marine territorial waters.
**Global 2013** | A similar model to the one developed previously in Global 2012 was used in Global 2013; however, since we modified the approach to setting the reference point, the calculation of the results has significantly changed.<br  /><br  />Global 2013 instead bases the reference point on harvested tonnes per coastal inhabitant (with coastal defined as within 25 km inland), under the assumption that production depends on the presence of coastal communities that can provide the labor force, infrastructures, and economic demand to support the development and economic viability of mariculture facilities. Thus, two regions with an equal number of coastal inhabitants harvesting an equal tonnage of cultured seafood should score the same, even if one is larger than the other, as the productivity is commensurate to each region’s socio-economic potential to develop mariculture. Stated another way, mariculture development is assumed to scale proportionally with coastal population as a proxy for local demand and potential logistic limitations to farm development, e.g., presence of infrastructures, coastal access, and locally available workforce. Given the very high skew in the status values per region, we set the reference point to the 95th percentile region (Thailand), with all regions above that value set to a status score = 1.0 | Global 2013 differs from Global 2012 due to the reference point; see below. |
**Brazil (2014)** | The status of the Mariculture sub-goal was calculated using harvest data reported by the Brazilian Institute of the Environment and Renewable Natural Resources (IBAMA). For each of up to four species cultured within the state, the score was determined by the yield, the reference sustainable production per unit area, and the total potential farming area. <br  /><br  />At the regional scale in Brazil, restricting the area available for Mariculture based on biophysical constraints and social preferences was possible. | Locally cultured species were used to calculate scores and appropriate reference points were set for each species state. |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | The status of the Mariculture sub-goal was calculated as the sustainable production density of shellfish biomass from mariculture relative to a target level of production density for each state within the region.<br  /><br  /> For the mariculture sub-goal, the reference point was modified to incorporate local information on suitable areas for cultivation and desirable production targets, proposed by the US government agency responsible for marine resources management (NOAA). This is a case where conceptually the US West Coast approach is similar to Assessments 1 and 2 but the reference point is based on better information. | Better information about physical and social limitations on mariculture allotments was available for the regional study in the US West Coast. The US government has identified areas that are appropriate for mariculture based on current water quality and coastal development, and thus mariculture production was assessed only within these predefined areas, and not for the entire coastline as was done in Global 2012. In addition, a target level of production increase was proposed by the ocean government agency that was used to set the reference point. |

***
