**Monitor and Re-evaluate to Determine Policy Effectiveness and Set New Priorities**

If the Index were adopted as a management tool, recalculating scores regularly could reveal whether management actions had the intended effect on both overall ocean health and particular goals. This objective demonstrates the power (and necessity) of having a quantitative, repeatable, transparent and comprehensive method for assessment.  We also highlight the importance of ongoing and future monitoring that will provide robust data relevant to ocean health assessment. 

Other more complex, emergent tradeoffs become visible only when the Index is measured over time and one can track how goal scores change in similar or opposite directions. Because of the complexity of ecosystem responses, full attribution of a change in one goal causing a change in another goal is difficult, but such patterns can provide insight on where to direct further exploration of such possible tradeoffs. The ability to calculate past status scores, and then correlate changes in the Index with past management actions, illustrates a key way it can be used to assess management effectiveness. If the Index were adopted as a management tool, recalculating scores regularly could reveal whether management actions had the intended effect on both overall ocean health and particular goals. This objective demonstrates the power (and necessity) of having a quantitative, repeatable, transparent and comprehensive method for assessment. Therefore, you should plan to conduct Ocean Health Index assessments on regular intervals (every year, two years, five years, etc.) This will allow you to determine the effectiveness of your ocean health interventions and will help inform [adaptive management](http://www.fs.fed.us/pnw/pubs/pnw_gtr654.pdf) strategies: an iterative management process where your actions are constantly adapting to the changing environment.
