# **Need for and Benefits of an Ocean Health Index**

> The Index is the first assessment framework that provides a common platform for scientifically combining and comparing key elements from all dimensions of the ocean to measure how sustainably people are using the ocean.

Marine management today  requires establishing comprehensive management objectives that maximize the ocean-derived benefits delivered to people while at the same time keeping oceans healthy. This requires a dynamic cycle of understanding current conditions, developing and enacting strategic management, and understanding how conditions have changed in response. The Ocean Health Index (OHI, or 'the Index') was developed to support this growing need by providing a framework that quantifies overall how well ocean-derived benefits are delivered to people now and in the future. The Index is the first assessment tool that provides a common platform for scientifically combining and comparing key elements from all dimensions of the oceans health — biological, physical, economic, and social – to measure how sustainably people are using the ocean.

Overall Index scores are a combination of components, known as **goals**, of ocean health. Goal scores are calculated using the best available data and indicators within the spatial scale of the assessment. Scores reflect how well coastal regions optimize their potential ocean benefits and services in a sustainable way relative to a reference point or policy target, on a scale of 0 to 100. The Index was developed as a framework to assess coastal oceans in a formulaic manner, and was designed to be customizable given different scales, data availabilities, and cultural priorities. In this way, it can be tailored to fit any spatial context to meet both ecological and political needs.

 <!---Let's rework this last paragraph (below): the first two sentences below don't really say anything tangible. It should be made more clear that the framework was developed using the best available science, and is flexible to include characteristics and priorities of any assessment... --->

While building the Index is a structured approach, the approach is scalable and the structure may change adaptively with each new assessment. The Index compares scores within an area's scope and provides a consistent platform from which to conduct assessments through time. It measures and track changes in the various dimensions through a process that is repeatable, transparent, quantitative, and goal-driven. By combining ocean and coastal benefits under a single framework, then, the Index allows for a comprehensive and integrated view of marine systems as well as a better understanding of potential trade-offs or synergies among these goals.

#### How is OHI Different?

<!---There is a bit of redundancy between these two paragraphs; I think they can be combined into one paragraph to describe how it's more composite than individual indicators. But other topics to develop in this section: models are developed using the best available information (thus OHI can be tailored to represent many contexts, it's not 'one size fits all'), reference points are set based on what people want from the ocean (often set by gvt policy or best understanding of the system), etc. We can keep it short but highlight important attributes of OHI that will be developed further in the Conceptual Guide.  --->

The Ocean Health Index defines a healthy ocean as one that delivers a range of benefits to people now and in the future. It  tracks ocean health comprehensively, including information from economics as well as environmental and social sciences, which are often tracked separately. Part of the success of future benefits comes from present actions taken safeguard ocean health now, and this is given credit in the scores. This index is different from other indicator-based monitoring systems such as the Millennium Development Goals because other systems contain indicators which individually assess performance in a particular task, sector, or topic. Performing successfully in many or all categories undoubtedly improves overall performance, but does not provide information on the relationship between the different indicators and sectors evaluated.

As a composite index, the Ocean Health Index integrates the results for and relationships between all categories that it evaluates. By integrating information across disciplines and sectors, the Index represents a significant advance over conventional single-sector approaches to assessing ocean condition. As a management tool, the Index can inform decision-making by helping stakeholders identify geographic and thematic priorities for management, which increases the cost-effectiveness of actions taken. At the same time, it addresses the desire for policymakers to increase environmental performance in the face of tightening budget constraints for natural resource management and conservation, and galvanizes efforts towards ecosystem-based management.
