## **Natural Products**

> The **Natural Products** goal describes how sustainably people harvest non-food products from the sea.

#### Philosophy

**Natural Products** evaluates the levels of sustainability for all ocean-derived goods that are traded. These include shells, sponges, corals, seaweeds, fish oil, and ornamental fishes, among other things. It does not included products that are consumed for only nutrition, but may in some cases include products that are consumed as medicine. In the Global Assessments, the goal model calculates overall status by weighting the status of sustainable harvest of each extracted marine product by its proportional value relative to other harvested products. Higher scores reflect sustainable extraction of non-food ocean resources with little to no impact on surrounding habitats, marine species, or human well-being.

#### Ideal Approach

Ideally, quantity, value, and a sustainability rating of the harvest method would be available for every marine and coastally-derived natural product within the regions of a study area. This would include a wide range of products, including corals, shells, seaweeds, aquarium fish, mangrove wood, or any non-food marine product that is harvested within a region. The ideal reference point would be derived from a functional relationship of the sustainability of the harvest for each product relative to the amount of product available in the ecosystem, informed by scientific studies. 

#### Keep in Mind

This goal does not include non-living items such as oil, gas, and mining products, because these practices are not considered to be sustainable. They are also done at such relatively large scales that including them would essentially make an index for those sectors specifically. This goal also does not include any valuation of things like bioprospecting for medicines through genetic discoveries, which  has an unpredictable potential value occurring in the future rather than measurable value now.

 The activities that drive this goal can interact with other goals and sub-goals when unsustainable harvesting practices are used. Because so little is known about some of the functions relationships between the amount of natural products taken and the effect of harvest on their quantities in the ecosystem, assumptions often have to be made to set the reference points in the calculations.

#### History of the Approach

Assessment | Model Description and Reference Point | Evolution of Approach | Interpreting a score
---------------|------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------|
**Global 2012** | For the status of each product, we assessed the most recent harvest (in metric tons) per region relative to a fraction of the maximum value (in 2008 USD) ever achieved in that region. This was under the assumption that the maximum achieved at any point in time was likely the maximum possible, and that the sustainable maximum harvest was lower than that value, similarly to what is known about maximum fisheries harvests (Srinivasan et al., 2008). The status for each natural product category is calculated separately and then combined by weighting each category by the proportional value of that product relative to the total value of all products. Part of the status calculation for each product category is a measure of sustainability; the goal captures exposure, risk, and viability of harvesting the product.<br  /><br  />The reference point for Natural Products was based on the fisheries concept of maximum sustainable yield (MSY), applied to the extraction of natural products. MSY was assessed for each type of product quantified globally, and a temporal (historic benchmark) reference point for each product was defined as 35% below the maximum harvest that had been produced to date in the region being evaluated. The 35% buffer protects against the possibility that the maximum historical harvest was not sustainable. A high score indicates that a region’s current sustainable rate of harvest is near to and not more than 65% of the historic maximum possible sustainable harvest achieved in that region. | Natural products data were available for coral, ornamental fish, fish oil, seaweeds and marine plants, shells, and sponges from the UN FAO. Using these data, we weighted each category by the sustainability of harvest. We did not have data for other key natural products such as wood from mangroves, and we excluded oils from mammals as they are widely seen as (currently) unsustainably harvested due to low mammal populations. Mammal oils represented a small (~<2%) and decreasing amount of total oil harvest each year (since 1993 it has been well below 1%), although for some regions it remains a significant percent of total oil harvested. | A score of 100 would indicate that a region’s natural product yield equals 65% of its historic maximum. A low score indicates that a region has the potential to improve sustainable harvests of natural products, either by eliminating overharvesting, increasing harvests that are too low, or reducing the pressures that decrease potential harvests. The more natural products extracted sustainably, the higher the score, provided that the harvest does not exceed the 65% precautionary level.
**Global 2013** | The goal model and reference point had the same approach as Global 2012, although the data processing did change | We used the same data and basic approach as for Global 2012, but developed several methods to fill gaps in data that resulted from inconsistencies in the data reported to FAO. In particular, many regions only report either data on harvest or on the monetary value of each product for a given year, but not both. Since the score is computed as a weighted sum of individual product scores, if either the weight or the product score was 0, these mismatches in reporting would cause products to ‘drop out’ of the calculation of overall status, thus losing real data.  The gap filling methods we developed estimated the US dollar value of harvested products from the tonnage reported; or the tonnage harvested based on a product’s reported economic value. |
**Brazil (2014)** | The goal models and reference points used the same approach as Global 2012 | This used the same data and approach as for Global 2012. |
**U.S. West Coast (2014)** | Not included in this assessment. Scores were not calculated because there are few data available on local-scale harvest and this is currently no longer pursued in any measurable quantities, and in the past had occurred mostly in the southern California region. Given this situation, the two options for how to include this goal in the assessment were to give the southern California region a zero (lowering the overall Index score), or to have the goal drop out completely of the assessment. The former option would assume there was demand for seaweed that was no longer met because the resource had been depleted, the latter assumes there is not enough demand for seaweed to make it commercially viable and so it is no longer harvested. We felt the latter was a more likely scenario. | Because this goal was not included, this assessment  had 9 goals that all had equal weighting. |

***
