**Reference points**To assess how well a goal is being delivered, it is necessary to identify the target to which it will be compared. This target is called the reference point. In an Ocean Health Index framework, setting the reference point enables the numeric values relevant for each goal to be scaled between zero and one hundred (where one hundred means that the current status is equal to the target reference point, and zero means that it is as far from the target reference point as is possible). Sharing a common range for scores makes all goal scores comparable. The reference point may be a target value at some time in the past, a comparison with some other location (such as the best performing region), a target previously established by a treaty or other agreement, or---best of all---a target determined by an accepted input-output equation (also called a production function).It can be advantageous to translate a management goal to a maximization or minimization problem with an objective function so that it is clear exactly how an indicator should be developed to track progress. Indeed, these choices significantly influence the evaluation of a goal’s status. For instance, a sustainable seafood management goal could be measured in terms of yields if the goal is focused on maximizing food provision or in number of jobs if the goal is focused on maximizing social and economic welfare. These two goal framings would lead to the development of different targets in terms of both yields and level of employment. Where necessary, our conceptual framework encourages the reframing of management goals to ensure that the corresponding indicators, and the units in which they are reported, accurately portray the intent of the goal as it is stated. Please see Section VI for more details on practical application of these concepts.It is important to understand that setting a reference point is a choice. This choice can be informed by the literature and by expert advice, and can be discussed in terms of costs and benefits. However, ultimately there is no optimum and certainly not only one solution, and this can be very uncomfortable. This makes setting a reference point difficult, but even more important to define explicitly.