##**Understanding Resilience**Resilience is the sum of the ecological factors and social initiatives (policies, laws, indicators of good governance, etc.) that can positively affect goal scores by reducing or eliminating pressures. This is because resilience in the Index framework acts to reduce pressures in each region. Therefore, resilience measures must not only be directly or indirectly relevant to ocean health, but must be in response to a pressure layer affecting a goal.*Ultimately, it is resilience that will help determine the future of ocean health.* Resilience actions are the best way to improve a score for a country, because they can reduce pressures, protect ocean habitats and species, improve status, and optimize benefits to people.<!---Move practical guidance to manual, consolidate resilience section--->###Guide to searching for resilience metricsIn practical terms, resilience is hard to define and you may have to get creative to develop appropriate assessment measures for these pressure layers.A resilience measure can be a law, a policy, or a performance evaluation that speaks to the effectiveness of a policy instrument. It can be metrically be defined as presence-versus-absence (zero or one), or on a scale if the measure is an assessment or score. For instance in the 2013 Global OHI study, the resilience measures that were counted in the socio-economic resilience class was data from the World Governance Indicators (http://govindicators.org). In a regional context, however, a more appropriate data layer might be a local governance index of some kind, preferably developed by a reputable organization using credible methods.####Ideal Approach <!---source from 2012 Global SM--->Ideally, assessments of social resilience would include state and federal level rules and other relevant institutional mechanisms as well. However, such information is extremely difficult to access for every single country, and so we relied on global datasets that focus on international treaties and assessments. Another key gap is information on social norms and community (and other local-scale) institutions (such as tenure or use rights) that influence resource use and management in many settings. Information on these institutions is also extremely difficult to find at a global scale, although the WGI partly measures their effectiveness through its inclusion of corruption indices.