####Practical Considerations

#### Ideal Approach

Ideally,  information would be available to allow you to to assess the amount of carbon stored in every coastal habitat in your area. The best information would show area covered and some measure of the quality of the habitat for this goal. For example, a dense mangrove forest would be better quality than a sparse mangrove forest. Additionally, different weights would be assigned to the habitats based on their relative ability to store carbon, and this factor could be used to penalize areas where there is greater loss of carbon and reward areas where this is a greater storage of carbon. The carbon storage model could then incorporate such weights in a similar way to the **Coastal Protection** goal. The reference point for habitat-based goals will likely bes temporal in most cases. This means that historic data are needed so that current habitat values can be compared to a past state.

>TIP: Understanding habitat carbon storage rates is an area of ongoing research. The capacity for habitats to store carbon varies, and depends on the morphology of plants in the system.

### Ready to start on **Carbon Storage**?

The overall **Carbon Storage** model and approach should not change from what is used in the current Global model. Knowing the area and the condition of of carbon-storing habitats are the two components that are most important. For example, if you have area of mangrove coverage and density of the mangroves within that area, you will find more robust results. It may not be the case in practice to have both variables, however.

One of the first decisions for your team to make is **whether to use the available data** in the Global Assessments or to use another dataset. This is because your goal model shouldn't change entirely from the Global, and you could even use the global data layers that are spatially-explicit and offered at a resolution of 1 km^2. The global data layers show mangroves, saltmarshes, and sea grasses. Further, they are already available for you to use and will therefore expedite your process for this goal. You should think here, however, of how your regions' size compare to the dataset's scale, and return to this question once you are thinking about the **reference points** farther on. You should also remember that we recommend using habitats that can store carbon on the order of 100 years, thereby limiting the types of habitat types you will need.

> TIP:, if you look at your default data on the WebApp, you will see **Carbon Storage** information presented for **mangroves**, **salt marshes**, and **sea grass** even if there are no mangroves in your area. You will not be scored on these if they are not in your area.

The second group of items to consider are the **condition** and **carbon contribution** if you can find the data for it. **Condition** is more essential than **contribution** in this case. **Contribution** is how much each habitat stores relatively to the others--such as the rates of carbon uptake as measured by empirical data. For this you would have to go to the literature and find ratios of organic nutrient uptake between habitats, and you would have to make sure these studies are done correctly to represent your area. For example, were the studies done with a young mangrove forest, or an older one, which might have different growth rates? The **condition**, on the other hand, is a judgment made to find how well the habitat is doing now compared to how it was doing in the past.

> For example, in Global 2012, seagrass's condition was calculated as "Current % cover or hectares of habitat divided by reference % cover or hectares." Salt marshes, on the other hand, were assigned a score of 1 if they had an increasing or stable trend, and assigned 0.5 if they had a decreasing trend.

A vital consideration for this goal is **the reference point**. It's an important decision to be made based on good science given the limitations of available data. The reference point is the extent of the habitat at some time in the past, in other words the ideal condition. You will need historical data for this--either from satellites, published papers, or even hand-drawn maps. For questions of sustainability, you must consider, what is a good year to set as your historical past extent? Do you want to be ambitious and set it far in the past, so it gets closer to a more "pristine" condition? Or do you want to make it represent human use? Will it make your scores look better or worse if you choose a more recent or more distant example?

> In the U.S. West Coast assessment (2014), researchers went to the local public library to find hand-drawn maps of historical salt marsh extents in California. No digital data were available in the 1850s!

In this case, perhaps your choice of historical reference point may be guided by a policy target as well. For example, are there any climate change policies in your area, with defined targets and objectives? Are there any restoration or carbon storage projects in your area? Do any organizations offer guidance on the amount of carbon storage your management policies should be aiming for?
