### **LIVELIHOODS**
#### Practical Considerations

#### *Ideal Approach*

Ideally, this goal would capture all marine sectors that supply jobs and wages to coastal communities, incorporating information on the sustainability of different sectors and also working conditions and job satisfaction/identity. The jobs and revenue produced from marine-related industries directly benefit those who are employed, but also those that gain substantial indirect value from community identity, tax revenue, and other related economic and social impacts of a stable coastal economy. Capturing the indirect as well as direct benefits from jobs, wages and revenue from coastal communities and beyond is best; where data do not exist, multipliers derived from the literature can be incorporated into jobs to attempt to capture this. The reference point in this sub-goal will likely be set as a moving window temporal approach and/or a spatial comparison.

#### Recommendations for regional assessments

Within the livelihoods sub-goal, there is also the possibility of weighting the two subcomponents unequally (in all three assessments these are weighted equally), for example if the number of jobs was considered more important than the wages rendered.

There is another important decision to be made: what is a marine-related sector? There are jobs that are directly connected to the marine environment, such as shipping, fishing, longshore workers, but also some that are connected indirectly, such as supplies and supporting industries. The use of multipliers in attempts to capture the indirect revenue generated by jobs more indirectly associated to marine sectors is a well-established method in economics, and is encouraged in this approach. In terms of reference points: in the livelihoods sub-goal, jobs had a moving target temporal comparison and wages had a spatial comparison. Comparing the number of jobs across different places would require at the very least adjusting values by the size of the workforce in each location. We highly recommend keeping the reference point for jobs as a temporal comparison, and only using a spatial comparison for wages (adjusted by purchasing power).

#### Global Data Approach

###What to do when you don't have new data

Question: do we have the old format of data going back in time? If so can we check to see how wages per sector change over time? If they all change in the same way (eg following broader economic trends) within a country, then we could use those temporal relationships to project forward per sector per country.


<!---From #438--->

In the past, the International Labour Organization provided wage data for ~150 occupations. We then categorized these occupations to get wage data for 5 major occupations related to marine environments:

Tourism
Commercial Fishing
Transportation & Fishing
Ports & Harbors
Ships & Boat Building
Here is a table summarizing how these data were grouped:
