##Tourism and Recreation
###Practical Considerations

###*Ideal Approach*:

Ideally, information would be available on how the ocean is used for enjoyment by both local residents and tourists, thereby capturing the full value of touristic and recreational activities. Models will vary greatly depending on data available: there are many ways to potentially measure the delivery of this goal. The type of reference point used will depend on the data available.

**History of the Approach (lessons learned 2014)**
<!---Taken from Conceptual Guide v2--->

Tourism & Recreation:
This goal measures the value people have for experiencing and taking pleasure in coastal areas. Tourism and recreation in coastal areas is a major component of thriving coastal communities and a measure of how much people value ocean systems, i.e. by traveling to coastal and ocean areas, people express their preference for visiting these places. This goal is not about the revenue or livelihoods that are generated by tourism and recreation (that is captured in the livelihoods goal) but instead captures the value that people have for experiencing and enjoying coastal areas.

###Recommendations for regional assessments

This is an excellent example of having to create a model using data that are suboptimal for the goal’s aim, but it also shows how flexible the OHI approach is to adapting models with improved data or approaches. If possible, using an approach like the US West Coast or Global 2013 is preferable than the approach used in Global 2012.

There are potentially dozens of variables that affect the number of people that engage in tourism and recreation within a region and where they go, including local and global economies, infrastructure to support the activities, promotion of particular locations, safety and security, political stability, and so on. Because we currently do not know which variables matter and to what degree, or have data for many of these variables, we instead assume that tourists distribute themselves within a region proportional to where local populations are, i.e. that populated areas get a greater proportion of the tourists. The reference point used will depend upon the types of data incorporated into the model.

####Model description

**Global 2012:**
Data on international arrivals were used as a proxy for the value of tourism and recreation in each region, as this was the most comprehensive data available on a global scale. Additionally, the length of each tourist’s stay in a region was incorporated: we used tourist-days as the measure for this goal because some locations, especially remote ones, may receive fewer arrivals but tourists may stay for longer periods of time. We therefore multiplied the number of arrivals by the average length of stay in order to incorporate this information. Sustainability was incorporated by using the tourism competitiveness index (TTCI) from the World Economic Forum to capture the sustainability of the tourism industry. To account for different surface areas and number of inhabitants across regions, the tourist-day values were adjusted by local population size.

**Global 2013:**
We calculated the proportion of direct employment in the tourism industry relative to total labor force. As in Global 2012, we used the tourism competitiveness index (TTCI) from the World Economic Forum to capture the socio-economic sustainability of the tourism industry.

**Brazil:**
The model developed for Global 2012 was changed to use information on hotel employees for each coastal municipality in Brazil. Status was measured for each coastal state as the density of hotel jobs in coastal areas.
We log-transformed coastal area under the assumption that density of hotel employees is not necessarily a measure of sustainable tourism, but that a balance likely exists between the density of tourists and the absolute number of tourists that a state receives (even if spread out over a larger area). Although the TTCI was included in the model as a measure of sustainability, this value is calculated at the national level, and was therefore applied equally to all states. Due to this, it has no effect on differences between regions within Brazil. The model could be improved if a state-specific index assessing sustainability of coastal tourism were available.

**US West Coast:**
At this scale we were able to make use of detailed studies documenting the changes in participation in 19 different marine and coastal specific recreational activities over time. These data come from the National Survey on Recreation and the Environment (NSRE), which has been conducted 8 times nationally since 1960, with the most recent data available for coastal and marine specific activities from 2000. These observations were used to produce a predictive model that was employed to estimate participation rates in recent years, because the survey data were no longer being collected.

###Evolution of the approach:

**Global 2012:**
It is very difficult to have a quantitative measure of whether people are fully taking advantage of recreation opportunities offered by marine and coastal environments. We assumed that the amount of international arrivals (although this ignores domestic travel and recreation), however, could be informative of the desirability of a coastal location and that this must have some relation with the health of the system. We use a spatial comparison reference point that compares each region to the best performing regions. In order to compare different regions, we standardize by dividing the arrivals by the region’s population.

Few non-economic indicators of tourism and recreation exist at the global scale, and thus the original approach in Global 2012 approximated this goal measuring the number of international tourists arriving by airline to coastal regions, accounting for their average length of stay, and adjusting by the region’s population size. This approach was sub-optimal because it did not account for domestic tourism, which is a large part of tourism in many regions. Also, since we only had information about total arrivals, not just those of people who were intending to spend time on the coast, we standardized by dividing by the total population, not just the coastal inhabitants, which tended to penalize especially large regions with large stretches of inhabited inland areas such as Canada, Australia and the USA.

We log-transformed the status scores because of an extremely exponential distribution of scores driven by a few regions with much higher tourism rates relative to population size. Even after this transformation the distribution of scores remained strongly exponential and so we rescaled scores to the value of the 90th percentile region, which was 25% of the maximum score. The 17 regions above this score were all given status scores = 1.0.

**Global 2013:**
We created a new model different from Global 2012 by using employment in the tourism sector as a reasonable proxy measure for the total number of people engaged in coastal tourism and recreation activities. Employment within this sector should respond dynamically to the number of people participating in tourist activities, based on the assumption that the number of hotel employees, travel agents and employees of other affiliated professions will increase or decrease with changing tourism demand within different regions.

Ideally there would be data available specifically for employment in coastal tourism industries, however the best data available at a global scale report total number of jobs, not just coastal jobs, within the travel and tourism industries. These data include jobs that are directly connected to the tourism and travel industry (i.e. for both leisure and business), including accommodation services, food and beverage services, retail trade, transportation services, and cultural, sports and recreational services, but exclude investment industries and suppliers. Unfortunately it was not possible to determine the proportion of jobs affiliated with strictly leisure travel. However, some (unknown) proportion of business travelers also enjoy the coast for leisure during their visit to coastal areas, such that we assumed all travel and tourism employment was related to tourism and recreation values. Additionally, it is true that not every tourist stays in a hotel and not everyone staying in a hotel is a tourist. Nevertheless, these data are of better quality and closer to what this goal is trying to capture than those used in Global 2012.

**Brazil:**
The goal model for Brazil assumes that the majority of coastal hotels are located in proximity to the shoreline, and that the number of hotel employees is directly proportional to the volume of tourists an area receives. A report evaluating drivers of tourism in Brazil found a significant positive relationship between number of tourists and number of hotels; here we incorporate hotel employees which is likely a more sensitive metric, given that hotels can vary greatly in size and economic changes are likely to be reflected more quickly in number of jobs than number of hotel establishments.

**US West Coast:**
For the tourism and recreation goal we developed an approach that took advantage of time series data on participation in a range of coastal and marine tourism and recreational activities. Participation rates more closely matched the intent of this goal and were a more robust proxy than international tourist arrivals data, i.e., the proxy used in Global 2012. We also changed the tourism and recreation reference point from spatial (used in the global analysis, where having values from >170 assessed regions made this reasonable) to temporal (given availability of time-series and limited scope for spatial comparisons).

####The reference point:

**Global 2012:**
Global 2012 used a spatial comparison reference point that compares each region to the best performing regions.

**Global 2013:**
To determine the reference point, we identified the best scoring region across all years and rescaled all other regions across all years to that score (Bonaire; 2011, which was the most recent year of data). The high-scoring regions were outliers in the distribution of scores (the second best performing region scored 40 and the third scored 28); we therefore rescaled all scores to the 90th percentile score. All regions above this score received a status score of 100.

**Brazil:**
The reference value used was the highest status value across all states over the time series, which was Rio de Janeiro in 2011.

**US West Coast:**
This model employs a temporal reference point, comparing current status to the status in the year 2000.

####Interpreting a score:

A score of 100 in US West Coast would indicate that tourism in a specific place has not declined compared to its value in the reference year. In other assessments this would indicate that a value was not lower than the region with the highest score.
